---
layout: post
title: "A Chance for Retail in the Amazon Age"
date: 2017-8-08
---
All across the country, malls - the intersection of social and commercial life for the last several decades - are dead or dying. The Internet - more precisely, a book company - came for them. Amazon came for them. Maybe not on purpose, but too late to stop now. Amazon has created a simpler retail world - migrate to ecommerce, or die.

Only Amazon hasn't stopped at traditional retail items - books, electronics, clothing - they're coming for food. The collective market freakout when Amazon announced they were acquiring Whole Foods was [swift and decisive](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-06-16/grocery-stocks-stumble-after-amazon-s-whole-foods-purchase). So that's it then, you'll just order all your food on Amazon, and it'll be delivered in big green freezer bags. Only I don't think that's it. Amazon is really good at logistics \(probably the best, [here](https://techcrunch.com/2017/05/14/why-amazon-is-eating-the-world/) is a great perspective on how they do it\), but food is a different monster. Food isn't just about getting there fast - which Amazon has clearly proven they can accomplish. It's about getting there when it's convenient. No matter what Amazon will say, I believe people will have a problem leaving an order of ice cream outside in one of those green bags in the middle of the summer for a few hours. That's the promise of grocery and convenience stores that Amazon will have a hard time beating - they're there with the products you want *when you want them* \(I mean, we do call them *convenience* stores...\). But, if Amazon has proven anything, it's that they can change consumer preferences very quickly.

So, instead of taking the chance that Amazon can't pull off the grocery and convenience thing, retailers need to start playing by Amazon's rules - more data means better models, which means more customers, which means more data. Amazon only became Amazon when they ditched human book reviewers for recommender models. The rest is, at this point, history.

I work for a consumer packaged goods organization - FIJI Water, specifically, but our parent, The Wonderful Company, holds other CPG companies as well. You can get your water ecommerce-style, via our [storefront](https://store.fijiwater.com/) and, yes, on [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/s/ref=lp_2591828011_nr_p_85_0?srs=2591828011&fst=as%3Aoff&rh=i%3Aspecialty-aps%2Cp_85%3A1&ie=UTF8&qid=1503602936) or in your local store. I organize the data we receive from vendors and syndicated sources \([here](/blog/2017/06/23/flat-file-pipeline) is a short explanation of that system\), and I've seen retailer data systems first hand. In most cases, it's a grim sight.

Big enterprise systems tend to be behind, but usually only by a few years. However, this isn't a few years. There are no APIs to hit with requests. If there is a database, it's hidden under layers of proprietary "business intelligence" tools or \(*shudder*\) MicroStrategy. In order to get exports from these systems, retailers often charge brands six-figure sums \(ostensibly for an "analyst"\). In my opinion, while the IT departments of these retailers were busy saying new technology wasn't "production ready", locking into proprietary stacks, and trying desperately to end their stigma as a cost center, their few-year lag left them in the dust. Amazon can serve product recommendations to hundreds of millions of users in \(near\) real time. You'd be lucky to get a CSV file with last week's sales in 15 minutes on a typical retailer system.

So, what now? Retailers might have a defensible market position in food, but Amazon has an internal velocity that looks like \(and is, in most cases\) light speed. In my opinion, the best defense here is a good offense. Use Amazon's best product - the public cloud - to fight back against Amazon. Only, it's not Amazon's cloud.

Say hello to the CAP Theorem. It's not having a very good year. In the past, your systems could only have two of the three - consistency, high availability and partition tolerance. Now, say hello to [Google Spanner](https://cloud.google.com/spanner/), where you can have all of them \(or at least a good abstraction of the three. Read the paper [here](https://research.google.com/pubs/pub45855.html).\) No more complicated sharding schemes and replication systems. Spanner is big, it's available, and it's perfectly suited for a retail data system. Spanner isn't going to go down in the middle of the day, so retailers can count on it to run every operation. It's plain ANSI SQL, so it doesn't require any additional engineering skills. Best of all, if it can handle Google's query load, it can handle any query load. Retailers can pick their poison with the ingestion system and provide access to brands via a REST API, Pub/Sub system or in a modern data warehouse like BigQuery or Redshift.

Sure, a Spanner-based system would be expensive \(though not *that* [expensive](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2017-05-04/can-wal-mart-s-expensive-new-e-commerce-operation-compete-with-amazon)\), but it's the easy solution. And, if I may be so bold, there's an opportunity for collaboration here. The cost of the system can easily be shared by multiple retailers by pushing the engineering and management of the system to a 3rd party \(or, in an ideal world, a single system for the entire planet\). Like I said, Amazon has made retail simple - retailers are only useful to the consumer if they have what the consumer wants, when they want it. Building a real-time data system that can be accessed by both retailers and brands enables that - it's possible, it's necessary, and it needs to happen now.

But, I could be wrong. Retailers have survived this long, perhaps they'll survive forever. Though, if Amazon does win, it won't be shifting market dynamics or consumer preference that caused it. The Amazon Age only requires you do one thing - more data means better models, which means more customers, which means more data. There aren't a whole lot of excuses for missing that boat.
