---
layout: post
title: "The Big One"
date: 2017-11-28
excerpt: "The one about jobs, education and a poorly timed mistake"
---
Imagine, for a moment, that you could plan out your entire life before you were born. It's an odd exercise, to imagine a perfect life. Now introduce some constraints - the people, places and resources you have immediate access to when your were born. Now multiply that by 7 billion. I apologize if that diminishes the individual in you, but we each are born into a world with constraints - we join the Big Graph.

There are, of course, likely paths we each take through the graph, along with inflection points that can fundamentally alter those paths. Most inflection points are our own, in that they only affect individual paths \(this is not to say there isn't a bleeding effect, but we'll leave that alone for now\). Some inflection points, however, are inherently tied to multiple paths. We call those group decisions, and today I'd like to explore one Big Group Decision in particular.

Transport yourself back to the summer of 2008, as the US housing market came crashing down amidst rampant speculation and soaring valuations. I don't want to engage in an exploration of what happened, but I'd like to propose that cascading thinking may have averted the crisis entirely, and can certainly be used as a tool to avert the next crisis. The basics go like this: banks approved loans to many people who carried immense risk of default. These loans had built-in "teaser rates" that very few people noticed when signing their loan. As the teaser rates expired, default rates rose to historical highs. In addition, banks had securitized groups of mortgages as bonds, then split those bonds into tranches based on their risk and grouped and sold those as securities as well. Each time the security was split, the potential return rose - and so did the risk. When the underlying assets dried up, banks found themselves on the hook for many multiples of the assets' original value. You may think that's the cascade, but it isn't - it's just the beginning.

The United States, and indeed the world, endures an economic crisis just about every two decades like clockwork. Despite irrational reasons for many of these crises, they have become an accepted fact of economics. However, not since the Great Depression has a crisis begun a cascade like the one we face today. One of the hallmarks of a critical cascade is the combination of many failures magnifying the effects of the others. The Great Depression touched every aspect of global life, and while this next cascade may not have global reach, it has the potential to end the United States as we know it.

Student debt has eclipsed all other forms of debt in value for the first time, and thanks to an ingrained feedback loop, shows no signs of slowing down. More and more jobs in today's economy require a minimum of a bachelor's degree - or at least that's what companies are saying. In reality, I am skeptical every job requires four years of higher education. However, the economic reality in the wake of the 2008 crisis only solidified this relationship. As the economy fell and jobs disappeared, it became more attractive to go to college instead of joining the workforce - the prevailing notion was the the opportunity cost had flipped in favor of education since there were no jobs available. It was probably true, but as the number of students in higher education increased dramatically, schools were forced to increase the cost of tuition - simple supply and demand. When the economy began to recover, however, the number of students continued to rise, and so have costs.

The effectiveness of higher education in economic terms isn't foolproof - wages haven't moved very much in two decades, productivity is stagnant or falling in most industries, and Americans work more hours than people in nearly every other Western nation. It has other benefits, but none that are as quantifiable as its economic effects. This isn't the last part of the cascade though - through a stroke of luck, this has all fallen at precisely the wrong time.

If you had planned your life within our constraints, you might expect to retire from the workforce one day. Everyone has a slightly different number, but for many decades in the United States, the age was 60 to 65. Take 60 to 65 years off 2008, and you find yourself right at the beginning of the largest population explosion in American history - the Baby Boom. In 2008, the generation born in the aftermath of World War II was finally reaching retirement age, and at the same time, the generation born in the 1980s was ready to join the workforce in earnest. It seemed like a perfect scenario - older workers would transition out, replaced by younger workers. Tax revenue would remain stable to support social security programs, and the economy would continue moving upwards. The housing crisis killed any chance of that happening. Older workers watched retirement savings and pension plans evaporate and younger people decided to stay in school, rather than test the nonexistent job market. As older workers stayed in the workforce, many in positions of seniority due to their experience, upward mobility became limited and leadership opportunities disappeared for the next generation.

This is the cascade. At our current pace, there will be a leadership gap at some point in the future. It may be decades until it's exposed, or something we didn't see coming may cause it to surface earlier. Either way, this is the benefit of cascading thinking. When bankers started reaching for return and tolerating more and more risk, there was no thought of the worst case scenario, and there shouldn't have been. They didn't see that their decisions interacted with more than their own paths.

Now that we've seen the aftermath of these decisions, it's time to start thinking in cascades. According to economic history, we're halfway between crises, and we are definitely not halfway to changing the way we think. I have little doubt we will be forced to survive whatever crisis comes next with our current methods, and that will likely be enough. When the cascade starts to become apparent, however, it will be too late. Some cascades are limited in scope, and can be mitigated by reaction alone. Leadership gaps, untenable debt loads and labor inelasticity are not limited in scope, and the longer we wait, the more we will have to solve these problems concurrently, instead of in isolation. There isn't a single person, group or institution that can fix this cascade. We must fix this cascade.

Good luck.
