---
layout: post
title: "Life on Mars"
date: 2018-2-9
excerpt: "The one about the future"
---
<div class="ui center aligned container">
<iframe src='https://gfycat.com/ifr/UnderstatedArcticDairycow' frameborder='0' scrolling='no' allowfullscreen width='560' height='315'></iframe>
</div>


That is, undoubtedly, one of the coolest things I've ever seen. Beyond that, the success of the Falcon Heavy test puts the entire inner solar system within our grasp, and, if SpaceX can continue their stellar run, it can be in our grasp for a reasonable price.

There is a lot of hype being thrown around right now, and for good reason, but there are some important caveats to this test. The Falcon 9 booster and Falcon Heavy configuration are designed for operations to Earth orbits, and SpaceX has yet to send a human into space aboard either platform. This is an amazing first step, and proves that with modern materials and methods, space is not only the domain of large governments. The next step is more difficult, and more dangerous. I've talked about the challenges we face as a civilization with going to other planets before, but I'd like to lay out, in more detail, some of the steps I think we should take, starting today, to make life on Mars a reality.

There simply isn't another body beyond Earth in this solar system capable of easily harboring human life. Mercury is too hot and too cold, Venus, despite its proximity and reasonable surface gravity, is far too hot thanks to a runaway greenhouse effect \(not to mention it's heavy, toxic atmosphere\). Anything in the outer planets is too far away, and even the largest moons have only a fraction of Earth's surface gravity. Mars, to its credit, has none of the hallmarks of habitably beyond its orbit dipping briefly in the habitable zone of our sun. Mars lacks a magnetic field, which led to its atmosphere being stripped away over billions of years by the solar winds. Without some kind of greenhouse effect, the planet is freezing at best, and lack of atmospheric pressure makes liquid water impossible on the surface. The lack of a magnetic field and thick atmosphere also means the surface of Mars is open to harsh solar radiation. Its surface gravity is less than 40% of Earth's. Despite all the issues, Mars is our best option for colonization. We may not be able to eliminate these concerns, but we can solve them.

Elon Musk buying a tunnel boring machine shouldn't have been a surprise - if you want to live on Mars, it's going to be underground \(though fixing LA traffic isn't something I'd be opposed to either...\). Tunneling under the Martian surface solves a couple of key issues. First, dig far enough underground, and solar radiation ceases to be an issue. Second, living underground helps you avoid the nasty Martian dust storms that can engulf the entire planet. Beyond that, a sealed cave system could regulate its own atmosphere and provide heating. The key, of course, is getting the massive digging equipment required to even start the job on the planet. That means launching it into Earth orbit, putting it in a transfer orbit to Mars, landing it on Mars without breaking it, unpacking it, starting it up, and keeping it going. Sure, you could send some people along with it to make sure all that goes well, but then you've got to send all the stuff people need - shelter, air, food, water, etc. - not to mention the enormous risk those people take spending months of their life in microgravity during transit and years digging tunnels they will likely never have the chance to use. When Elon said people could make tons of money digging tunnels, I don't think he meant just on this planet. So to all the very smart people out there working on self-driving cars, how about we work on self-driving tunnel boring machines instead?

As someone who has had the great fortune of debugging asynchronous logic, this next one is near and dear to my heart. One of reasons any of this is even possible is our extraordinary leaps in computer science. Mars will be no different than Earth. Everything will need compute due to the requirement for multiple redundancies at every level. Martians will want Google, Netflix and access to all the services we can easily reach now on Earth. We have made great strides developing systems that are partition tolerant - capable of functioning without constant connection - but light delay \(about 24 minutes at maximum distance\) makes round trip latency an impossibility for Martians. An air filtration system, for instance, can't wait up to 48 minutes to detect an anomaly. Operations need to happen in real time. The best way, as we have shown on Earth, is to be close to your compute. Public cloud datacenters, colocation facilities and edge points of presence make up the compute backbone of Earth, and a similar system will have to be implemented on Mars. So, for all the engineers who deploy to a public cloud, look out for your provider's datacenter and edge locations opening on Mars soon \(and good luck with the fun new edge cases you'll have to debug\)!

Imagination has a funny way of putting Earth and Mars in opposition, but it won't work that way. When someone asks why we would bother building for Mars, here's the justification - if you can build a self-driving tunnel boring machine to work on Mars, you can build one that will work on Earth too. Life on Mars should just be life on Earth. In a pressurized tunnel. In four tenths g.
